Blogs in Astro can be
done a number of ways.
You can do it with a third-party API.
You can do it by just creating
pages if you wanted to.
And recently, as of Astro 2,
you can put in content collections,
which are a way of letting Astro
kind of do some of the work for us.
I will briefly put this up on the screen.
Let's go to the Astro Docs and
I'll look up content collections here.
And the general idea is that you
create a content folder inside your
source directory that is identified
to Astro as a magic folder, and
then you create collections
by creating a folder.
So if we want a collection called
newsletter, we create the newsletter
folder and then anything inside of it is
considered a part of that collection.
And this again allows
us to define eschema so
that we can keep the frontmatter
of that markdown typesafe.
And we can enforce that every entry in
a content collection has a slug and
a date and an author and
a required category.
Or we can just make sure that frontmatter
that we don't support doesn't get added in
which over time can make our
markdown really difficult to manage,
because we don't know what's required,
what's actually used.
The schema can make sure that
we're very clear on that.
So our case, we're going to set up a blog.
So, we're going to create
a new folder called Content.
Inside of Content, we're going to
create a new folder again, and
this one's gonna be called Blog.
And up in the the workshop Assets,
I have two markdown files.
They both are prefixed with numbers.
So 01 is our first blog, and I'm going
to copy that into the blog folder.
Then 02 is the second one, and I'm going
to copy that into the block folder.
So those are going to be our blog posts,
and each one has a title,
slug, date, description.
This is the front matter that
we can define with a schema.
Next, we're going to
actually configure this.
So let me make this a little bit bigger.
Inside the content directory,
not the blog, so top-level content,
we want to add a new file, and
we're going to call it config.ts.
And this is how we configure
content collections and Astro.
We're going to grab a couple
things from Astro content.
And let's see if it's
going to give those to me,
defined, I think I need to stop and
restart.
So let's stop and restart.
Now that we've got content collections and
that's going to generate some types and
stuff for us.
And you can see here that now it's
created like a .astro folder and
that's got some of the things that are
gonna make our lives a lot easier here.
So then I can get define collection and
Z, which is their packaging Zod for
convenience so
that we can define our our schema.
So I'm gonna export a cons
called collections, and
that is what Astro's gonna look for
to grab out our content collections.
Now we can make as many
of these as we want.
In our case, we only need the one, so
I'm gonna give it a name
that matches the folder.
So blog, blog.
And then we use that define collection and
pass in an object.
And the object has one property that
we're gonna use, which is schema.
And then we use Zod to actually define it.
So I'm going to do a z .object.
This is probably gonna be the case for
every content collection,
it's gonna start with a z .object.
And then I want a title,
which will be a z.string.
I want a date, which is a z.date.
This is something I love about Zod is you
get more fine-grained control than putting
in a string or something like that.
You can just say, I want this to
be a date, and it'll complain.
Okay, so he doesn't put a date in it.
Whereas if it was a string they could put
in whatever they wanted and it would be,
yeah that looks fine.
So then we want our description.
The description is going to be a string.
And because this is going to go,
this would be what I would use for like a,
Social media preview or something.
So I'm gonna set a max of 200 characters,
because we want that to something that's
not gonna get cut off in the previews.
And that's that.
That's a whole content schema.
We've got everything that we need
to make this thing actually work.
Any questions about I introduced
a couple of things pretty quickly there
anything on Zod?
I'm not going to cover Zod it in depth,
but
I can talk about it at
kind of a high level.
I guess to talk about it
at a bit of a high level,
Zod is a way to do schema definition
that is TypeScript friendly.
And what makes this really powerful is
that TypeScript only works statically.
It runs at compile time, right?
Runtime, you don't get any TypeScript
help because by that point,
all the TypeScript has been compiled away.
It gets removed at the build.
So, Zod actually continues to
do type checking at runtime,
which is important when you're
dealing with third-party data.
Like, if we have an API and
we want to pull in some data and
make sure that the API didn't change and
like give us some errors.
If it did, then Zod would let us do that
whereas a TypeScript file wouldn't buy
it because it can't write
like when I'm running
this code in production
that TypeScript is gone.
And we don't know what the third party API
is sending unless we're actually parsing
it as it comes in.
So Zod is kind of a it's like
an enhancement on top of TypeScript that
adds a lot of extra power and
a lot of extra type safety,
especially when you start crossing
the boundaries of services.
In the case of Astro, this is really nice
because it allows us to do something like
type markdown because we're able to parse
that front matter on the way through.
I don't know that that would be
possible without a lot of it,
it would be challenging to get
the kind of type inference that we're
getting here without using some kind
of a schema definition tool like Zod.
So, yeah, question.
>> I don't know if it's outta context, but
could you speak a little bit
about the difference between
something like next.JS,
gets static props for creating
a blog versus creating a blog with astro
>> Yeah,
they're going to be really similar.
In fact,
I believe that ASTRO even uses get
static props as a API method to do this.
Unless, let me see.
Skip ahead here for a second.
It gets out of pads.
So yeah, if they share a lot in
common in terms of the API's
>> The functionally,
they're kind of the same, you are fetching
some things ahead of time and
then passing it to Astro or
next in a format that it understands,
so that it's able to say, okay, I know
that I'm going to get these posts and
I need to have dynamic page endpoints.
For each one so that it renders
properly or with get get static props,
you're kind of doing the same thing.
Here's all the data that I need.
I want that to be available to
these pages when they load and
you do that ahead of rendering.
So from a functional standpoint,
you can you can think of them
as being roughly the same thing.
And when we get into
the implementation here in a second,
you'll you'll see why I say that.
So the first thing I want to do is
actually do like a list of blog posts.
So we're gonna create the blog home page.
And we'll do that by going into
the pages directory, new file, and
blog.astro is the name of the file itself.
Give it some front matter because
this is an Astro component.
And I want to import a helper
function called get collection,
and this is generated by Astro and the way
that they make this work is they they
set it up like this where it
says Astro colon content, and
that gives us the the helpers that are
generated from the schema that we created.
So that's in that .Astro folder, the
generated stuff we're getting access to
these sorts of things that that will then
be used to actually generate the page.
Next up we want to grab our layout.
So this one is going to
be our page layout and
down below we're gonna
grab our blog posts.
So to grab the blog posts we're gonna
wait and we will get our collection.
And this should,
if I've done my job right, there it is,
autocomplete to show us
the available collections.
So now we have our blog posts loaded
into a variable from our collection,
and we can use those
then to build out a page.
So we've got our layout.
I'm gonna set up a section.
That section is going to have
a class of blog entries.
And inside of it, we're going to loop.
So blog posts.map.
And we'll call this a post.
And then we want to
return a div class post.
And inside of that.
We're going to set up a,
we want to show the title.
The title in this case
is going to be linked.
So a Href, and we're going to do a bit of,
of kind of string stuff here.
So we want our blog posts
to live at /blog /the slug.
So we're going to set that up and
we'll grab the post.slug.
Now, if you note,I did define a slug.
Never mind,
it will auto generate a slug for you.
But if you add a slug in
the frontmatter it'll use that instead.
So you do have that control
that I do that in both I did.
I can maybe show that the other way if we
want, then I'm gonna grab the post.data.
And now data is where, stop,
where the front matter shows up.
So the post itself has
a few properties on it.
Data is where the front matter comes in.
And as you can see, as I'm hovering over
the top here, we've got the date, title,
and description.
And I want to grab out
the title in this case, okay?
Next, I'm going to set up a time and
we'll set the date time property in here.
And I want that to be post.
Data date to ISO string and
that's because we're passing
it in as the date time attribute
which means that Google and
other tools can,
pass it as being an actual time.
Kind of thing you have to do but
it can be helpful for your.
Your various SEO efforts.
And then we'll do,
this one is a to date string,
because that means I don't have
to format a date manually.
And that makes me very happy.
And these are browser like platform APIs.
This comes out as odd because
we've told it that it's a date so
it makes sure that we get a date object.
Next, we're gonna grab the,
Description And
then we're going to do a little,
we're gonna actually just do
the exact same thing we did up here.
So I'm gonna copy paste this,
grab out that link.
But instead of the title,
I want it to say, read post.
Okay, so this will get the content on
the screen, but it's not styled yet.
So we want to also add a style sheet.
And I can grab that out
of the workshop assets.
We've got pages blog.CSS in here.
And I'm just going to drop this in and
save it, and
get back out here,
head over to the blog, and there we go.
So that's a Content Collection in action,
right, and I think again this is one
of the really powerful things about this
approach is that, we have the ability
here to very quickly stand up something
like a blog and if it's I mean granted.
This makes the assumption that
everybody who's gonna work on
the blog is comfortable with Markdown and
pushing things to get.
So a markdown based blog comes
with a heavy set of caveats for
who can actually use and maintain it.
But if you're a team of devs, and
you're trying to set up a blog and
you want that to work, or you've got
a team that's very good savvy that
maybe aren't devs but are very
comfortable with working in Markdown.
You can do this so fast like just a matter
of a few minutes you can get a blog up and
running.
And I really think that's a powerful
way to start even if it's not where you
eventually land, if you end up landing
on a content management system.
And here's the thing that's
really cool about this is that,
this Swapping this out to be a load all
my posts from Contentful or Sanity,
you've already written a Zod schema for
it.
So you can just grab that Zod schema and
move the data from Contentful or Sanity or
whatever into that same Zod schema.
You don't have to change any
other code at that point.
You would just be swapping this
out to be load from my CMS.
Use my schema that I defined and
here is my content.
And that is a really powerful move, right?
So it opens the door for get started
quickly and be prepared to continue to
grow over time without heavy refactoring
burning it down and starting from scratch.
So, now that we've got this blog,
everything's looking the way that I
want it to, I'm very happy about that.
I hope you're very happy about that.
And if we click through
to one of the posts,
we can see that it does use the right,
so it uses the slug.
But we haven't built these pages yet.
So we're seeing our (404).
So the next thing we need to do is
build those individual blog pages.
And this is gonna introduce
dynamic routing in Astro.
So you may have seen this if you've worked
with a framework like next or remix.
Same general concept, it's gonna look
really familiar if you've ever built like
get static paths export in Next.
So why don't we go ahead and do that.